[Event "Karlsbad"]
[Site "Karlsbad"]
[Date "1911.08.22"]
[EventDate "1911.08.21"]
[Round "2"]
[Result "1-0"]
[White "Akiba Rubinstein"]
[Black "Oldrich Duras"]
[ECO "A22"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "103"]

1.c4 {Notes by Nimzowitsch} e5 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.g3 Bb4 4.Bg2 O-O
5.Nf3 Re8 6.O-O Nc6 {The exchange ...Bxc3 was to be
considered.} 7.Nd5 Bf8 8.d3 h6 9.b3 d6 10.Bb2 Nxd5 11.cxd5 Ne7
12.e4 c5 {In the long run something must be done for the
c-Pawn.} 13.dxc6 Nxc6 14.d4 Bg4 15.d5 Ne7 {We have now got our
Pawn chain, and the Black base, the pawn at d6, already seems
exposed (from the side), just as if the typical attack had
been made on it by c4-c5-cxd ...cxd.} 16.Qd3 Qd7 17.Nd2 {The
Knight is already being sent forward to the attack on the
exposed base.} Bh3 18.a4 {To safeguard the Knight position on
c4.} Bxg2 19.Kxg2 Reb8 20.Nc4 b5 21.axb5 Qxb5 22.Ra3 {In this
and similar positions the question arises, which Pawn is the
weaker, White's b-Pawn or Black's a-Pawn? In the present case
this problem could be solved by logical deduction. Since
Black's Pawn at d6 is weaker than White's Pawn at d5, a like
relation must exist throughout what remains of the Queen's
wing. Were this not the case then White's a4 must have been
wrong, and that is unlikely. Was he in fact not justified in
supporting2 his own important Knight at c4? But that would be
absurd. No, Nc4 was indicated, similarly a4; hence ... b5 must
have led to a less favorable position for Black. And the
course of the game proves the correctness of this judgement.}
Ng6 {...Nc8 would perhaps have been better.} 23.Rfa1 a6 24.Bc1
Rb7 25.Be3 f6 26.f3 {If Black could manage to play ...f5, his
position would not be so bad. But this is out of the question,
and Black is besieged.} Ne7 27.Qf1 {Threatening Nxd6.} Nc8
28.Nd2 Qb4 29.Qc4 Qxc4 30.Nxc4 Rab8 31.Nd2 Rc7 32.Rxa6 {The
masterly and varied uses made of the points d2 and c4 should
be noted.} Rc2 33.R6a2 Rxa2 34.Rxa2 {The rest of the game
which consists of bringing the King to the center followed by
an advance in close order of the fighting unit Bishop, Knight
and King is easily intelligible.} Be7 35.Kf2 Kf7 36.Ke2 Ke8
37.Kd3 Kd7 38.Kc3 Bd8 39.Nc4 {c3 is our shelter.} Bc7 40.g4
Bd8 41.Ra6 Bc7 42.h4 Bd8 43.h5 Bc7 44.b4 Rb7 45.Ra8 Kd8 46.Kb3
Rb8 47.Rxb8 Bxb8 48.b5 Ne7 49.b6 f5 {There is nothing left to
hope for.} 50.gxf5 Ng8 51.Bf2 Kc8 52.Bh4 1-0
