[Event "USA-06.Congress New York"]
[Site "New York, NY USA"]
[Date "1889.04.24"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "25"]
[Result "1-0"]
[White "Mikhail Chigorin"]
[Black "Max Judd"]
[ECO "C30"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "81"]

1.e4 {Analysis by Wilhelm Steinitz.} e5 2.f4 Bc5 3.Nf3 d6
4.Nc3 Nf6 5.Bc4 Nc6 6.d3 a6 {Black clearly cannot afford this
loss of time, which enables the adversary to block the QB. O-O
is here the proper move. If White then plays f5, Black may
answer Na5, followed by c6 and d5.} 7.f5 Na5 8.Bb3 {a3, which
Anderssen used to play in similar position, is, we believe,
stronger, as Black has nothing better than to exchange the
bishop and the open Q file will add to White's advantage.}
Nxb3 9.axb3 c6 10.Qe2 Bb6 11.Bg5 Bc7 12.O-O Qe7 13.Kh1 Bd7
14.b4 {Preparing an attack in case Black should play O-O-O.}
Rd8 {We think that Black would have been safer, nevertheless,
with his King by O-O-O than on the other wing, where he is
driven to take shelter subsequently. His rook is also an
obstruction now for his QB, which subsequently has to be
posted at d8.} 15.Qf2 Bc8 16.Rae1 O-O 17.g4 Rde8 18.Rg1 Kh8
{Bishop d8 at once, in order to release his Queen, was by far
better.} 19.Qh4 Bd8 20.Rg3 h6 21.Rh3 Kg8 22.Bxh6 Nd7 23.f6
{Though this wins the exchange, 23. Bg5 f6 24. Bd2 followed by
Rg1 and g5, was much more forcible.} Qxf6 24.Bg5 Qh6 {This
ingenious move, by which Black escapes at the expense of the
exchange from the pressure of an apparently irresistible
attack against the King, was probably overlooked by White in
his forecalculation on the 23d move.} 25.Qxh6 gxh6 26.Bxh6 Bf6
27.Bxf8 Nxf8 28.Rg3 Ng6 29.Nd1 Kf8 30.Ne3 Nf4 31.Nf5 Rd8 32.g5
Be7 33.N3h4 Be6 34.g6 Bxf5 35.g7+ Kg8 36.Nxf5 Ng6 37.Reg1 Bf6
38.Rxg6 fxg6 39.Rxg6 {Winding up with irresistible power.} Kf7
40.Rg4 Bxg7 {There was no remedy, as Nh6+ was threatened.}
41.Rxg7+ 1-0
