[Event "Karlsbad"]
[Site "Karlsbad CZE"]
[Date "1907.09.12"]
[EventDate "1907.??.??"]
[Round "17"]
[Result "1/2-1/2"]
[White "Geza Maroczy"]
[Black "Akiba Rubinstein"]
[ECO "C10"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "81"]

1.e4 {Notes by Dr. Emanuel Lasker in "Lasker's Chess Magazine"
1907. *** The most important game in the tournament, and in
many respects the most exciting, was the encounter between the
two leaders toward the close. Maroczy, the hero of many hard
fights, was half a point better off than the young Rubinstein,
but the latter had to meet weaker opponents subsequently. With
the instinct and judgement of a veteran, with confidence in
his ability to succeed in his remaining games, Rubinstein set
out with a determination to draw with Maroczy. The state of
the score would have impelled most players to take exceptional
risks in order to depose his antagonist and take his
place. Rubinstein is evidently au fait in all the arts of
winning tournaments besides games. An eyewitness thus
describes the attitude of the players at the conclusion of the
game: "That Rubinstein was perfectly satisfied with his
partial success was apparent from his beaming countenance;
Maroczy looked depressed in proportion.} e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3 dxe4
4.Nxe4 Nd7 5.Nf3 Ngf6 6.Nxf6+ {Under the circumstances White's
tactics cannot be commended. By exchanging he not only does
not simplify, but actually develops Black's game. It should be
Black's business for that reason to find out how to develop
the knight on d7. Far preferable would have been 6.Ng3 leaving
Black's game cramped.} Nxf6 7.Bd3 c5 8.dxc5 Bxc5 9.O-O O-O
10.Bg5 {White wastes time with this move, which could only be
justified if followed up with Bxf6. Instead, 10.Bf4 is much
better, for Black cannot reply with 10...Bd6, because of
11.Bxd6 Qxd6 12.Bxh7+ winning the queen.} Be7 11.Qe2 Qc7
12.Rad1 {In order to be able to advance the queenside pawns it
would have been better to have played 12.Rfe1.} Rd8 13.c4 Bd7
14.Bd2 Rac8 15.Bc3 Be8 16.Qc2 h6 17.Ne5 Nd7 {Black has
cleverly anticipated all possible attacks on the kingside. The
position is remarkable. The black king is only protected by
pawns, and White has considerable force bearing on it, yet
nothing tangible can be done.} 18.Nxd7 Bxd7 {If 18...Rxd7,
with the object of doubling, White would reply 19.Qe2,
threatening Qe4 with a very promising attack.} 19.Qe2 Bc6
20.Qg4 Bf8 21.f4 {White should play 21.Rfe1, threatening Bf6
with much the better game. It is impossible to give all the
combinations that might arise, but as an instance the
following will show a possible continuation showing why 21.Bf6
cannot be played at once: 21...Rd7 22.Rfe1 Kh8 23.Be5 Qd8
24.Re3 f5 25.Qg6 Qg5 26.Rg3 Qxg6 27.Rxg6 Rcd8 28.Rxh6+ Kg8
29.Rh3 Be4 winning a piece.} Rxd3 {! As a means of winning,
this sacrifice cannot be recommended. But taking into account
that Black realized that his position was getting very
difficult, this move is highly ingenious and shows great power
of resistance. For the exchange versus a pawn Black has got
rid of one of the most dangerous pieces.} 22.Rxd3 Be4 23.Rd2
{If 23.Rg3 then 23...Qxc4 24.Bxg7 Bf5 25.Qh4 Bxg7 26.Qf6 Bg6
and Black should win.} Qxc4 24.Rfd1 Bd5 25.h3 {This is an
unnecessary defense, as Black does not threaten anything. The
proper thing to do would be to play 25.a3 first, and so save
this pawn. Maroczy undoubtedly labored under some delusion
when he made the subsequent combination. Otherwise he would
certainly have acted on the reorganized principle that a
player with a superior force should first of all render
everything secure.} f5 26.Qg6 {Had White played 25.a3 as
suggested, he could have complacently played now 26.Qg3. To
defend this pawn now and leave the other would not permit many
winning chances.} Qxf4 27.Rxd5 {The countersacrifice nearly
wins. At the same time, White guards against the sacrifice of
a a second exchange, to be followed by ...Bd6.} Qe3+ 28.Kh1
exd5 29.Qxf5 Rd8 30.Rxd5 Qc1+ 31.Kh2 Bd6+ 32.Be5 Bc7 {This
innocent-looking move is the only one which draws easily. If
32...Bxe5+ 33.Qxe5 Rxd5 (otherwise White plays Rd7) 34.Qxd5+
Kh7 35.Qxb7 Qf4+ 36.g3 with a pawn to the good, though winning
would be remote.} 33.Rxd8+ Bxd8 34.Qd7 Qg5 35.Bg3 Qe7 36.Qxe7
Bxe7 37.Be5 Kf7 38.Kg3 g6 39.Kf4 Ke6 40.Ke4 h5 41.b3 1/2-1/2
