[Event "Prague"]
[Site "Prague CSR"]
[Date "1943.04.15"]
[EventDate "1943.04.10"]
[Round "6"]
[Result "0-1"]
[White "Friedrich Saemisch"]
[Black "Alexander Alekhine"]
[ECO "C79"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "54"]

1. e4 {Notes by Alekhine} e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6
5. O-O d6 6. Re1 {Better would have been Bxc6+ followed by
d4.} b5 7. Bb3 Na5 {The exchange of the White king's bishop
gives Black the present of the best prospects of obtaining
equality.} 8. d4 Nxb3 9. axb3 Nd7 {More common and perhaps
better is 9...Bb7. The text move in any case, provides White
with a problem which is not very easy to resolve.} 10. dxe5
{And-after forty-five minutes reflection!-Samisch, dismayed,
decides upon a liquidation which hands over to Black a very
peaceful game. Schmidt in his game against Keres at Salzburg
1943 played the proper manoeuver: 10 Bd2! followed by
Ba5. Black had to make considerable efforts to achieve a drawn
game.} Nxe5 {Not 10...dxe5 because of 11 Qd5.} 11. Nxe5 dxe5
12. Qxd8+ Kxd8 {The two Bishops promise Black a few remote
prospects but the exploitation of this advantage is not an
easy matter.} 13. Be3 Bb7 14. Nd2 {Nc3 would be simpler.} Bd6
15. f3 Ke7 16. Bf2 Ke6 17. Nf1 g6 {It is evident that Black
must attempt to open up the game in order to leave the field
free for his bishops.} 18. c3 a5 {In order to prevent 19 b4,
followed by Nd2-b3-c5.} 19. Ra2 {This move has no effect. But
it is already difficult to indicate a good defensive plan for
White.} Ra6 20. Ne3 f5 21. exf5+ gxf5 22. Nc2 Kf7 {! This
prevents 23 Nd4+. In this position f7 is the best square for
the king.} 23. b4 {White, after strenuous efforts, will
succeed in exchanging one bishop but in the meantime Black
will have secured other advantages.} a4 24. Bc5 Rg8 25. Kf2
Rc6 {! After this move White must make a decision: yield to
his opponent the command of the queen's file or opt for a new
restriction on the activity of his pieces after 26 Be3 f4
etc. In this latter case Black would also conserve excellent
winning chances.} 26. Bxd6 Rxd6 27. Re2 {? Losing
immediately. In any case even if he had played 27 g3
(definitely not 27 Rxe5 Rd2+ 28 Re2 Rxg2+! winning a piece)
which was the best move, he would not have saved the game. For
instance 27...Bd5 28 Raa1 Bc4 29 Rad1 Rgd8 30 Rxd6 Rxd6 and
the entry of the rook to the seventh rank will be decisive.}
Bd5 {This wins the exchange after 28 Ra1 Bc4, and all further
fight is impossible.} 0-1
