[Event "Madrid"]
[Site "Madrid"]
[Date "1945.??.??"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "?"]
[Result "0-1"]
[White "Arturo Pomar Salamanca"]
[Black "Alexander Alekhine"]
[ECO "C01"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "95"]

1. e4 {Notes by Alekhine} e6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 {The exchange
variation is very far from being as innocent as it
appears. This, of course, providing that one of the
protagonists plays for the advantage. Here, as we shall see,
it was Black who took it upon himself to complicate the game,
and not without danger, it must be confessed.} exd5 4. Bd3 Nc6
5. c3 Bd6 6. Nf3 Nge7 7. O-O Bg4 8. Re1 Qd7 9. Bg5 f6 {This
move was not obligatory now. He could perfectly well have
continued with 9...O-O-O and if 10 Bb5 then 10...f6 11. Bh4
Qf5 12 Nbd2 Ng6! 13 Bg3 Nce7 with better chances than in the
actual game.} 10. Bh4 O-O-O 11. Nbd2 h5 {I did not play
11...Ng6 12 Bg3 Nf4 because of the pin 13 Bb5 which seemed to
be unpleasant.} 12. Bg3 h4 13. Bxd6 Qxd6 {13...cxd6 deserved
to be taken into consideration, suppressing any danger of
attack against Black's castled position. In a general way
Black, whose whole interest is in winning, does not examine
carefully the details of the position and he will soon be
faced with a dilemma which is hardly pleasing.} 14. h3 Bh5
15. Qe2 Bf7 {In order to be able to play to win Black must
withdraw his bishop to a square without a future. Preferable
is 15...Bg6 16 Bxg6 Nxg6 17 Qe6+ Qe6 18 Rxe6 Nf4 19 Re3 g5
with a good game but with minimal chances of achieving victory
on account of the paucity of material.} 16. Nb3 Rde8 17. Nc5
Nd8 18. Qc2 b6 19. Nb3 {? There are positions in which a
combination is obligatory. In order to evade the necessary
mental effort the player lets slip his chances and little by
little finds himself reduced to the defensive and ends up by
suffering a defeat which logically is well merited. In this
particular case the offer of the knight by 19 b4 bxc5 and then
either 20 bxc5 (considered by me) or 20 dxc5 (analysed by
Pomar) would have secured White an irresistible attack, the
black pieces not being well arranged for the defence of his
King. It was not my intention to take the knight. I calculated
19 b4 Kb8 20 Reb1 Ka8 21 Na6 c6 and Black can defend himself
but it will be difficult for him to organize an attack on the
other wing.} g5 20. Nh2 {As no direct threat existed, the
demonstration 20 a4 would be the right move. Against 20...Rhg8
White would have had sufficient time available to play 21
Nh2.} Ne6 21. c4 {White's position starts becoming unpleasant
and Pomar perceives that he must undertake something. But the
price he pays for the opening of the c-file (the weakness of
the central pawn and the square d5 for the Black pieces) is
decidedly too high. 21 a4 a5! 22 Nd2 still offered some
possibilities.} dxc4 22. Bxc4 Kb8 {But not 22...Nd5 23 Qf5!}
23. Rac1 Nd8 24. Bxf7 Nxf7 {Now Black has a specific objective
for the endgame, the d-pawn, and he no longer has to attempt
direct attacks against the king.} 25. Qc4 Nd5 26. Qb5 {As will
be seen, the e-file here has no more than a relative value.}
Rxe1+ 27. Rxe1 c6 28. Qe2 Nh6 29. Nd2 Nf4 30. Qe4 Qd5 31. Nhf3
{If 31 Qxd5 cxd5!, followed by ...Rc8 etc., since 32 Rc1 is
impossible on account of 32...Ne2+.} Nf5 32. Kh1 {With the
object of being able to play 33 Rc1, but the king is badly
placed for the endgame.} Rd8 33. Rc1 Kb7 34. b3 Qxe4 35. Nxe4
Nd5 36. Re1 Kc7 37. Ned2 {It is obvious that White has a very
difficult game but with 37 a3 he could still have defended
himself. The plan foreseen by Black in this case was 37...Re8,
followed by ...Re6 and ...Nf4.} Nb4 {!} 38. Re6 Rd6 39. Re8
Nxa2 40. Ne4 Rd8 41. Rxd8 Kxd8 42. Nxf6 Nc1 43. b4 {Otherwise
after the capture of this pawn the Black a-pawn would advance
straight to its queening square.} Nd3 44. d5 Ke7 45. Nh7 cxd5
46. b5 g4 {!} 47. hxg4 Nxf2+ 48. Kg1 Nxg4 {There is no defense
against 49...Kd6, followed by 50...Kc5.} 0-1
