[Event "FIDE World Championship Tournament"]
[Site "Hague NLD/Moscow RUS"]
[Date "1948.04.13"]
[EventDate "?"]
[Round "12"]
[Result "1-0"]
[White "Mikhail Botvinnik"]
[Black "Max Euwe"]
[ECO "D49"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "71"]

1.d4 {Notes by International Grandmaster Raymond Keene from
"Battle of Bonn", ISBN-13: 978-1-906661-01-4, 2008. ---
Traditionally, the title of world champion is decided by a
mano a mano battle between the world's two top players. This
format was recognised even in the early matches between
Staunton and St Amant and Morphy and Anderssen which predate
the widely accepted year [1886] from which the Championship
officially emanates. The sole expection to this rule hitherto
was 1948 when Alekhine's death as incumbent caused an
interregnum which necessitated a five man match tournament to
decide the destination of the title. The Soviet iron man
Mikhail Botvinnik won easily, ahead of Vassily Smyslov, Paul
Keres, Sammy Reshevsky and in last place the former world
champion Dr Max Euwe. Botvinnik raced away with the tournament
making a clear plus score against all his rivals. He
considered the following to be his best game.} d5 2.Nf3 Nf6
3.c4 e6 4.Nc3 c6 5.e3 Nbd7 6.Bd3 dxc4 7.Bxc4 b5 8.Bd3 a6 9.e4
c5 10.e5 cxd4 11.Nxb5 axb5 12.exf6 Qb6 13.fxg7 Bxg7 14.O-O Nc5
15.Bf4 Bb7 16.Re1 Rd8 17.Rc1 Rd5 18.Be5 Bxe5 19.Rxe5 Rxe5
20.Nxe5 Nxd3 21.Qxd3 f6 22.Qg3 fxe5 23.Qg7 Rf8 24.Rc7 Qxc7
25.Qxc7 Bd5 26.Qxe5 d3 27.Qe3 Bc4 28.b3 Rf7 29.f3 Rd7 30.Qd2
e5 31.bxc4 bxc4 32.Kf2 Kf7 33.Ke3 Ke6 34.Qb4 Rc7 35.Kd2 Rc6
36.a4 {Black resigns. Almost 60 years after this game was
played, eight grandmasters assembled in Mexico City where they
were once again to decide the undisputed World Championship by
means of a tournament. This circumstance reflected the
resolution of the schism that had arisen in the chess world in
1993 and also the confusion surrounding Kasparov’s retirement
from world chess. The chosen ones were: world champion
Vladimir Kramnik, Viswanathan Anand, Peter Svidler, Alexander
Morozevich, Peter Leko, Alexander Grischuk, Lev Aronian and
Boris Gelfand. From this crucible, Anand emerged victorious,
and FIDE claimed that from 2008, the Championship would revert
to its traditional match format.} 1-0
