[Event "Hastings"]
[Site "Hastings ENG"]
[Date "1895.08.10"]
[EventDate "1895.08.05"]
[Round "5"]
[Result "1-0"]
[White "Amos Burn"]
[Black "David Janowski"]
[ECO "D37"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "125"]

1.d4 {Notes by I. Gunsberg} d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Nf3 Be7
5.e3 O-O 6.Be2 b6 7.O-O Bb7 8.Bd2 {We prefer to develop the
bishop on b2.} c5 9.cxd5 exd5 10.Rc1 Nc6 {We have a theory,
also expressed elsewhere, that the two pawns on the c-file and
the d-file, if atanding by themselves are conveniently placed
for attack. Black, therefore, should not have waited quietly
till it suited White to take off the pawns, but should have
forestalled that intention. Moreover, why does Black play
...c5 at all. If, therefore, as has been done in this game,
White does not stop the further advance of the pawn, by b3 and
Bb2, then the spirit of the opening requires ...c4 to be
played, which would place both White bishops in a wretchedly
confined position. White's b3 need not be feared in the least,
as the pawn could be taken off, and we consider that in that
case Black's isolated queen's pawn would not be weak. In the
great majority of cases ...Nd7 is a much stronger move than
...Nc6. It leaves the c-file open for the action of the rook,
and it offers good defensive resources in case of a king's
side attack, when Black could play Re8 and Nf8 in defence of
the h-pawn.} 11.Qa4 a6 {We still consider c4 a stronger move.}
12.dxc5 bxc5 13.Rfd1 Qb6 14.Qc2 Qc7 15.Na4 Ne4 16.Be1 Rfd8
17.a3 Ne5 18.b4 c4 {White having got his chance adopts the
right line of play, and attempts to weaken the advanced
pawns. Black cannot help himself, but must perforce provide
the White knight with a commanding square on d4. If Black had
played ...Nxf3+ first, then 19 Bxf3 c4 20 Bxe4 wins a pawn.}
19.Nd4 g6 20.f3 Nf6 21.Nb3 Bc6 22.Nd4 Be8 23.Nc3 a5 24.Rb1
axb4 25.axb4 Qb6 26.b5 Ra3 27.Bd2 Rda8 28.Bc1 {No better proof
of the opinion expressed in Note 1 can be sited than is
afforded by the fact that this bishop has to play back to its
original square in defence of the queen's side.} R3a7 29.f4
{White is adopting a vigorous policy. This move which looks
dangerous on the surface is really very good play, as the
knight on e5 has not a good square to play to. If Neg4 White
replies Bxg4 followed by Nxd5. There can be no doubt that the
task of defending these two pawns involve the player who
possesses them in difficulties of position and development.}
Ned7 30.Nc6 Bc5 {There was no better way of giving up the
exchange.} 31.Nxa7 Bxe3+ 32.Kh1 Bxc1 33.Nc6 Ba3 34.Bf3 Qe3
35.Nxd5 {This move marks the final consummation of White's
plans against Black's center pawns, and henceforward further
resistance is hopeless.} Nxd5 36.Bxd5 Nb6 37.Re1 Qxf4 38.Ne7+
Bxe7 39.Bxa8 Nxa8 40.Rxe7 Bxb5 41.Qe4 Qxe4 42.Rxe4 Nc7 43.Kg1
c3 44.Rc1 Nd5 45.Rd4 Bc6 46.Kf2 Kg7 47.g3 Kf6 48.Rc4 Bd7
49.Rc5 Be6 50.Ke2 h5 51.Rb5 h4 52.Kd3 hxg3 53.hxg3 Kg5 54.Kd4
Kg4 55.Rxd5 Bxd5 56.Kxd5 Kxg3 57.Ke5 f5 58.Rxc3+ Kg4 59.Rc4+
Kg3 60.Ra4 Kf3 61.Kf6 Kg3 62.Kg5 Kf3 63.Kxg6 1-0
