[Event "Hastings"]
[Site "Hastings ENG"]
[Date "1895.08.23"]
[EventDate "1895.08.05"]
[Round "14"]
[Result "1/2-1/2"]
[White "Wilhelm Steinitz"]
[Black "Amos Burn"]
[ECO "D37"]
[WhiteElo "?"]
[BlackElo "?"]
[PlyCount "107"]

1.d4 {Notes by I. Gunsberg} d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Nf3 Be7
5.Bf4 O-O 6.e3 c5 7.dxc5 Bxc5 8.cxd5 exd5 {There is not much
harm in this isolated Pawn. Black, however, could prevent it
by altering his tactics, and let such moves as b3 and Bb2
precede the advance of the c-pawn, which causes the isolated
Pawn.} 9.Bd3 Nc6 10.O-O Be6 11.Rc1 Rc8 12.Bb1 Qa5 {This is one
of those routine moves in this opening which, in this
particular instance, has no merits to recommend it.} 13.Nd2
Be7 14.Nb3 Qd8 15.Qd3 Qd7 16.Rfd1 Rfd8 17.Qe2 Qe8 18.Nb5 Bg4
19.f3 Be6 20.Bc7 Rd7 21.Bg3 Rdd8 22.a3 Kh8 23.Be1 Nd7 24.Bc3
Nb6 25.Qd3 Qg8 26.Na5 {Now we get a first glimpse of all this
subtle manceuvring. White under the guise of attacking the
isolated d-Pawn has placed his Pieces favourably for a King's
side attack. The move is peculiarly characteristic of
Mr. Steinitz's play. He does not depend on success in one
direction, but his attacks are formed with a view to their
bearing on all sides of the board. If Black replies to this
excellent move, which engages the Queen's side with Nxa5, then
Bxa5, threatening to follow tip with Bxb6 once more, would be
bad for Black. The only other move left to defend the White
b-Pawn would be Rd7, but this move would create weaknesses of
a different kind by blocking Black's Pieces.} d4 {This,
perhaps, was the least expected of Black's replies. A move of
this kind, however, under difficulties and pressure of time
limit, as this assuredly must have been, is often very useful;
it serves the purpose of defence better than the more cautious
move, such as Rd7 would have been. Very often it is well worth
while taking such risks. The position is extremely
interesting, and capable of treatment in many different ways.}
27.Nxc6 {Black has verily attained his object of creating a
dangerous complication. 27 Nxd4 would have avoided the
necessity of giving up a Piece.} bxc6 28.Nxd4 c5 29.Qa6 {His
only resource is to try for another Pawn ; with six Pawns to
three, White should be able to hold his own, but it is a poor
outcome of the fine position which he had previous to his 27th
move.} cxd4 30.Bxd4 Rxc1 31.Rxc1 Rc8 32.Rc3 { It seems that
White is not even going to have the satisfaction of getting a
second pawn, for if he now plays 32 Rc8+ Qxc8 33 Qxa7 Qc1+ 34
Kf2 Qd2+ 35 Kg3 Qe1+ 36 Kf4 Bd6+ and Black wins.} Rxc3 33.bxc3
Qb8 34.Qd3 f5 35.g4 Nc4 36.gxf5 Nxa3 37.fxe6 Qxb1+ 38.Qxb1
Nxb1 39.Kf2 Kg8 40.c4 Na3 41.c5 Nb5 42.f4 Nxd4 {This exchange
was not well advised, it unites White's Pawns therefore
lessens Black's chances of winning.} 43.exd4 Kf8 44.Ke3 Ke8
45.Kd3 Kd8 46.f5 Kc7 47.Kc4 a6 48.d5 Bf8 49.c6 Be7 50.Kb3 Kd6
51.Ka4 Bd8 52.Kb3 g5 53.fxg6 hxg6 54.h3 {The position is a
most peculiar one, and White deserves great credit for the
uphill fight. Of course, K x P is impossible, as then one of
the two Pawns would be bound to go in. The White King stops
the a-Pawn and the White Pawn stops the g-pawn.} 1/2-1/2
